pages/research.md, before:

---
title: Research
order: 2
permalink: "/research/"
---


I am an ecologist who uses a variety of quantitative macroecological and field based approaches to study introduced species and novel ecosystems. I am interested in studying these phenomena in the context of Earth's history and with an eye to the influence of cultural values on how we interpret biotic change. 

Climate projections put us on a course to the Eocene—a time when Greenland was a temperate forest and New Jersey was tropical. This, alongside ongoing landscape transformation and globalization, is
likely to drive a historically unprecedented shuffling of species—both from introductions and as species migrate on their own volition. Will these novel, no-analog communities function similar to native, heirloom communities and will they support biodiversity and human societies?

This question occupies a contentious space in ecology and conservation biology. On one hand, many in ecology and conservation policy see non-native species—both introduced and those that migrated on their own—as ecologically distinct from native ones and as drivers of ecosystem ‘degradation’. This position is usually justified by the proposition that long-term reciprocal coevolution is necessary for coexistence and ecosystem functioning by driving the formation of niche partitioning mechanisms, anti-predator behaviors, allelopathic tolerances, and so on. If so, the future is fraught and will require significant management to maintain functional and biodiverse ecosystems.

However, critics have pointed out that there is little evidence that long-term community-wide coevolutionary history happens or is necessary. Instead, neutral processes like ecological fitting
and mechanisms such as trophic cascades and phenotypic and cognitive plasticity may be more parsimonious explanations for species coexistence and ecosystem functioning. In this view, extinctions or regime shifts caused by non-native organisms may be more elegantly explained by ecological context (e.g., predator persecution, changes in disturbance, loss of breeding refugia) than by nativeness. If so, there is hope that future novel ecosystems can be both functional and diverse.

My research—spurred by field observations that did not square with the paradigms I had been taught—has contributed to this debate with a focus on introduced large herbivorous mammals (‘megafauna’). By studying introduced megafauna simply as wildlife, I have found fascinating processes hidden in plain sight. This includes work, published in [*Science*](/assets/pubs/Lundgren_et_al_2021b.pdf), that described how feral donkeys and horses dig wells of up to 2m in depth, which maintain water availability and provide resources used by a myriad of species; that mountain lion predation on feral donkeys leads to novel, behaviorally-mediated [trophic cascades](http://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.13766) that shape desert wetlands; and that if we decide to count introduced biodiversity as biodiversity, spatial conservation priorities (In Review) and patterns of modern and prehistoric biodiversity loss, in [numeric](/assets/pubs/Lundgren_et_al_2018.pdf) and [functional](/assets/pubs/Lundgren_et_al_2020.pdf) dimensions, can radically shift.z

Moving forward, I am interested in continuing curiosity-driven fieldwork in novel megafauna systems as well as leveraging large meta-analytic datasets to disentangle when nativeness actually matters. In what systems and with what organisms could an extraterrestrial ecologist determine whether a species was native or introduced based on their actual effects? 

Some of this work is already underway, where I found that functional traits (particularly muzzle width and body mass) shape the effects of megafauna on plant diversity, regardless of nativeness or coevolutionary history (Accepted in *Science*). However, moving forward, I hope to expand these approaches by incorporating tools from the field of metascience. This would consist of working with ecologists of divergent views to collaboratively develop hypotheses in good faith and to test them independently with the same data. In this way, I hope to facilitate a transition from acrimonious name-calling (e.g., ‘invasive species science denialists’) to the co-production of transformational knowledge.

Commit message:

text updates post-node-fixing

pages/research.md, after:

---
title: Research
order: 2
permalink: "/research/"
---


I am an ecologist who uses a variety of quantitative macroecological and field based approaches to study introduced species and novel ecosystems. I am interested in studying these phenomena in the context of Earth's history and with an eye to the influence of cultural values on how we interpret biotic change. 

We are in the midst of the Great Reshuffling: a historically unprecedented shuffling of species, both from introductions and as species migrate on their own volition in response to climate and landscape change. This reshuffling is only going to accelerate: climate projections put us on a course to the Eocene—a time when Greenland was a warm-temperate forest and New Jersey was tropical. Will future novel, no-analog communities function similar to native, heirloom communities and will they support biodiversity and human societies?

{% image "Eocene vegetation map.png", "alternate text" %}

My research—spurred by field observations that did not square with the paradigms I had been taught—has contributed to this question with a focus on introduced large herbivorous mammals (‘megafauna’). By studying introduced megafauna simply as wildlife, I have found fascinating processes hidden in plain sight. 

This includes work, published in [*Science*](/assets/pubs/Lundgren_et_al_2021b.pdf), that described how feral donkeys and horses dig wells of up to 2m in depth, which maintain water availability and provide resources used by a myriad of species; that mountain lion predation on feral donkeys leads to novel, behaviorally-mediated [trophic cascades](http://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.13766) that shape desert wetlands; and that if we decide to count introduced biodiversity as biodiversity, spatial conservation priorities (In Review) and patterns of modern and prehistoric biodiversity loss, in [numeric](/assets/pubs/Lundgren_et_al_2018.pdf) and [functional](/assets/pubs/Lundgren_et_al_2020.pdf) dimensions, can radically shift.

Moving forward, I am interested in continuing curiosity-driven fieldwork in novel megafauna systems as well as leveraging large meta-analytic datasets to disentangle when nativeness actually matters. In what systems and with what organisms could an extraterrestrial ecologist determine whether a species was native or introduced based on their actual effects? 

Some of this work is already underway, for instance I found that functional traits (particularly muzzle width and body mass) shape the effects of megafauna on plant diversity, regardless of nativeness or coevolutionary history (Accepted in *Science*). I am expanding this work by incorporating tools from the field of metascience, including by working with ecologists of divergent views to collaboratively develop hypotheses in good faith and to test them independently with the same data. In this way, I hope to facilitate a transition from acrimonious name-calling (e.g., ‘invasive species science denialists’) to the co-production of transformational knowledge.
